---
layout: post
title: The "Dumbest" Engineer in the Room
description:
      I discuss my mentality as a Software Engineer and how it helps me better
      become better at what I do.
---

# {{ page.title }}

You may have heard this idea before - "Be the dumbest person in the room."
Surround yourself with people who are smarter than you and you yourself will
become that much smarter.

I have a slightly different interpretation.

As a Software Engineer I don't necessarily aim to **be** the dumbest person in
the room (although I'd never shy away from that opportunity!) Instead, in a room
full of engineers, I choose to **believe** I am "the dumbest engineer in the
room." Sounds a little self-deprecating, doesn't it? Well, let me explain.

### It's Really Hard to be an Expert

This is especially the case in a field like Software Engineering. Technologies
and tools change so rapidly that its almost impossible to truly know it all.

Because of this, one aspect of being "the dumbest engineer in the room" is going
into a conversation believing the other person probably knows more than I do.
This allows me to have an open mind. If I choose to go into a conversation
assuming I know more than my fellow engineer, I've already decided that I have
nothing to learn from the conversation. Doesn't sound like its going to be a
fulfilling chat for any of us, does it?

In the end, even if I do know more than my counterpart, I've been able to
actually listen and maybe help them understand the subject a bit better. If, on
the other hand, I truly *was* the "dumbest engineer in the room" (which isn't
rare!) I've probably had the opportunity to ask why something is the way it
is or learn something new to add to my skill set.

### Your Good Solution May not be the Best Solution

Let's say I'm looking over some code and I recognize an iterative solution to a
problem that could be reduced or cleaned up a bit using recursion. Rather than
blindly believing my solution is *THE* solution and rewriting the code to use
recursion, I could take the "dumbest engineer in the room" approach and instead
comment on the line or ask the author something along the lines of, `Why did you
do it this way?` or `Why not use recursion?`

Maybe the author of the commit comes back and says, `We can't afford the extra
stack space for a recursive solution in this scenario.` Oh man, I hadn't thought
about that! If I had taken the first approach, I probably would have broken the
code... Oops. By being "the dumbest engineer in the room," I opened myself up to
understanding more about the problem at hand (and I didn't break everything!)

### Conclusion

Following this mindset in my personal and professional life has helped me truly
become a better Software Engineer. I know "dumb" is a strong word and I'm not
suggesting you belittle your intelligence or blindly take everyone's word as the
truth, but if you consistently ask why something you don't fully understand is
the way it is and are always cognizant of the fact that a fellow engineer (or
student, or friend, etc.) may know more than you do about something, you'll
learn so much more than if you were afraid to approach the situation as "the
dumbest engineer in the room."
